Ew app architecture case study (#11414)
flutter/website: src/content/app-architecture/case-study/ui-layer.md

The ViewModel exposes state as public members. 
On the ViewModel in the following code example,
the exposed data is a `User` object, 
as well as the user's saved itineraries which 
are exposed as an object of type `List<TripSummary>`.

```dart title=home_viewmodel.dart
class HomeViewModel {
  HomeViewModel({
   required BookingRepository bookingRepository, 
   required UserRepository userRepository,
  }) : _bookingRepository = bookingRepository,
      _userRepository = userRepository;
  
  final BookingRepository _bookingRepository;
  final UserRepository _userRepository;

  User? _user;
  User? get user => _user;

  List<BookingSummary> _bookings = [];
  UnmodifiableListView<BookingSummary> get bookings => UnmodifiableListView(_bookings);

// ... 
}
```

As mentioned, the UI state should be immutable.
This is a crucial part of bug-free software.

The compass app uses the [freezed][] package to 
enforce immutability on data classes. For example, 
the following code shows the `User` class definition. 
`freezed` provides deep immutability, 
and generates the code for useful methods like 

> `[copyWith](freezed.copywoith)`and `[toJson](jsonseralizable.toJson)`.

Reviewer: Code font has to go inside the link definitions:

```suggestion
[`copyWith`][freezed.copywith] and [`toJson`](jsonseralizable.toJson).
```

```dart title=user.dart
@freezed
class User with _$User {
  const factory User({
    /// The user's name.
    required String name,

    /// The user's picture URL.
    required String picture,
  }) = _User;

  factory User.fromJson(Map<String, Object?> json) => _$UserFromJson(json);
}

```

:::note
In the ViewModel example, 
two objects are needed to render the view. 
As the UI state for any given model grows in complexity, 

> a ViewModel may have many more pieces of data from 

Reviewer: ["may" should be avoided](https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#may) outside of legal text.

```suggestion
a ViewModel might have many more pieces of data from 
```

many more repositories exposed to the view. 
In some cases, 

> you may want to create objects that specifically represent the UI state. 

Reviewer: ["may" should be avoided](https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#may) outside of legal text.

```suggestion
you might want to create objects that specifically represent the UI state. 
```

> For example, I could create a class called `HomeUiState`.

Reviewer: This sentence shouldn't switch from "you" to "I".

```suggestion
For example, you could create a class named `HomeUiState`.
```

the data layer provides a new state. 
In the Compass app, ViewModels extend [`ChangeNotifier`][] to achieve this.

```dart title=home_viewmodel.dart
class HomeViewModel [!extends ChangeNotifier!] {
  HomeViewModel({
   required BookingRepository bookingRepository, 
   required UserRepository userRepository,
  }) : _bookingRepository = bookingRepository,
      _userRepository = userRepository;
  final BookingRepository _bookingRepository;
  final UserRepository _userRepository;

  User? _user;
  User? get user => _user;

  List<BookingSummary> _bookings = [];
  List<BookingSummary> get bookings => _bookings;

  // ... 
}
```

`HomeViewModel.user` is a public member that the view depends on. 
When new data flows from the data layer and 
new state needs to be emitted, [`notifyListeners`][] is called.

<figure>

![A screenshot of the booking screen of the compass app.](/assets/images/docs/app-architecture/case-study/mvvm-case-study-update-ui-steps.png)

    <figcaption style="font-style: italic">
This figure shows from a high-level how new data in the repository
propagates up to the UI layer and triggers a re-build of your Flutter widgets.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

> 1. New state is provided to the ViewModel from a Repository
> 2. The ViewModel updates its UI state to reflect the new data
> 3. ViewModel.notifyListeners is called, alerting the View of new UI State
> 4. The View (widget) re-renders.

Reviewer: If possible, lists should use [parallel construction](https://developers.google.com/style/lists?hl=en#parallel-syntax) and have consistent ending punctuation.

```suggestion
1. New state is provided to the ViewModel from a Repository.
2. The ViewModel updates its UI state to reflect the new data.
3. ViewModel.notifyListeners is called, alerting the View of new UI State.
4. The View (widget) re-renders.
```

For example, when the user navigates to the Home screen and the ViewModel is
created, the `_load` method is called. Until this method completes, the UI state
is empty, the view displays a loading indicator. When the `_load` method
completes, if it is successful, there is new data in the ViewModel, and it must
notify the view that new data is available.

```dart title=home_viewmodel.dart highlightLines=19
class HomeViewModel extends ChangeNotifier {
  // ...

 Future<Result> _load() async {
    try {
      final userResult = await _userRepository.getUser();
      switch (userResult) {
        case Ok<User>():
          _user = userResult.value;
          _log.fine('Loaded user');
        case Error<User>():
          _log.warning('Failed to load user', userResult.error);
      }

      // Load saved trips (omitted for brevity)

      return userResult;
    } finally {
      notifyListeners();
    }
  }
}

```

:::note
`ChangeNotifier` and [`ListenableBuilder`][] (discussed later on this page) are 
part of the Flutter SDK, 
and provide a good solution for updating the UI when state changes. 
You can also use a robust third-party state management solution, 

> such as [Riverpod][], [flutter_bloc][], or [Signals][]. 

Reviewer: See the previous comment about these package links.

Read more about using `ChangeNotifier` in 
our [state-management documentation][].
:::

## Define a View

A [View][] is a widget within your app. 
Often, a view represents one screen in your app that 
has its own route and includes a [`Scaffold`][] at the top of the
widget subtree, such as the `HomeScreen`, but this isn't always the case. 

Sometimes a view is a single UI element that
encapsulates functionality that needs to be re-used throughout the app. 
For example, the Compass app has a view called `LogoutButton`, 
which can be dropped anywhere in the widget tree that a user might 
expect to find a logout button.
The `LogoutButton` view has its own ViewModel called `LogoutViewModel`. 
And on larger screens, there might be multiple views on screen that 
would take up the full screen on mobile.

:::note
"View" is an abstract term, and one View does not equal one widget. 
Widgets are composable, and several can be combined to create one view. 
Therefore, ViewModels don't have a 1-to-1 relationship with widgets, 
but rather a 1-to-1 relation with a *collection* of widgets.
:::

The widgets within a view have three responsibilities:

> * Display the data properties from the ViewModel

Reviewer: Similar to earlier, list items should have consistent ending punctuation if possible.

* Listen for updates from the ViewModel and re-render when new data is available
* Attach callbacks from the ViewModel to event handlers, if applicable.

![A diagram showing a View's relationship to a ViewModel.](/assets/images/docs/app-architecture/guide/feature-architecture-simplified-View-highlighted.png)

Continuing the Home feature example, 

> the following code shows the definition of the ‘HomeScreen' view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the following code shows the definition of the `HomeScreen` view.
```

:::note Package recommendation
Instead of writing your own `Command` class, 
consider using the [flutter_command][] package, 
which is a robust library that implements classes like these.
:::

### Ensuring views can render before data exists

In ViewModel classes, commands are created in the constructor.

```dart title=home_viewmodel.dart highlightLines=8-9,15-16,24-30
class HomeViewModel extends ChangeNotifier {
  HomeViewModel({
   required BookingRepository bookingRepository, 
   required UserRepository userRepository,
  }) : _bookingRepository = bookingRepository,
      _userRepository = userRepository {
    // Load required data when this screen is built
    load = Command0(_load)..execute();
    deleteBooking = Command1(_deleteBooking);
  }

  final BookingRepository _bookingRepository;
  final UserRepository _userRepository;

  late Command0 load;
  late Command1<void, int> deleteBooking;

  User? _user;
  User? get user => _user;
  
  List<BookingSummary> _bookings = [];
  List<BookingSummary> get bookings => _bookings;

  Future<Result> _load() async {
    ...
  }

  Future<Result<void>> _deleteBooking(int id) async {
    ...
  }
  
  // ... 
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

The `Command.execute` method is asynchronous, 
so it can't guarantee that the data will be available when 
the view wants to render. This gets at *why* the Compass app uses `Commands`. 
In the view's `Widget.build` method, 
the command is used to conditionally render different widgets.

```dart title=home_viewmodel.dart
// ...
child: ListenableBuilder(
  listenable: [!viewModel.load!],
  builder: (context, child) {
    if ([!viewModel.load.running!]) {
      return const Center(child: CircularProgressIndicator());
    }

    if ([!viewModel.load.error!]) {
      return ErrorIndicator(
        title: AppLocalization.of(context).errorWhileLoadingHome,
        label: AppLocalization.of(context).tryAgain,
          onPressed: viewModel.load.execute,
        );
     }

    // The command has completed without error
    // return the main view widget
    return child!;
  },
),

// ...

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

Because the `load` command is a property that exists on 
the ViewModel rather than something ephemeral, 
it doesn't matter when the `load` method is called or when it resolves. 
For example, if the load command resolves before 
the `HomeScreen` widget was even created, 
it isn't a problem because the `Command` object still exists, 
and exposes the correct state.

This pattern standardizes how common UI problems are solved in the app, 
making your codebase less error-prone and more scalable, 
but it's not a pattern that every app will want to implement. 
Whether you want to use it is highly dependent on 
other architectural choices you make. 
Many libraries that help you manage state have 
their own tools to solve these problems. For example, 

> if you were to use [`Streams`][] and [`StreamBuilders`][] in your app,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if you were to use [streams][] and [`StreamBuilders`][] in your app,
```

And on larger screens, there might be multiple views on screen that 
would take up the full screen on mobile.

:::note
"View" is an abstract term, and one View does not equal one widget. 
Widgets are composable, and several can be combined to create one view. 
Therefore, ViewModels don't have a 1-to-1 relationship with widgets, 
but rather a 1-to-1 relation with a *collection* of widgets.
:::

The widgets within a view have three responsibilities:

* Display the data properties from the ViewModel
* Listen for updates from the ViewModel and re-render when new data is available
* Attach callbacks from the ViewModel to event handlers, if applicable.

<img src='/assets/images/docs/app-architecture/guide/feature-architecture-simplified-View-highlighted.png'
alt="A diagram showing a View's relationship to a ViewModel.">

Continuing the Home feature example, 
the following code shows the definition of the ‘HomeScreen' view.

```dart
// app/lib/ui/home/widgets/home_screen.dart

class HomeScreen extends StatelessWidget {
  const HomeScreen({super.key, required this.viewModel});

  final HomeViewModel viewModel;

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(

>       //...

Reviewer: To be consistent with other placeholders:

```suggestion
      // ...
```

                SliverList.builder(
                   itemCount: [!viewModel.bookings.length!],
                    itemBuilder: (_, index) => _Booking(
                      key: ValueKey([!viewModel.bookings[index].id!]),
                      booking:viewModel.bookings[index],
                      onTap: () => context.push(Routes.bookingWithId(
                         viewModel.bookings[index].id)),
                      onDismissed: (_) => viewModel.deleteBooking.execute(
                           viewModel.bookings[index].id,
                         ),
                    ),
                ),
              ],
            );
          },
        ),
      ),
```

### Update the UI 

The `HomeScreen` widget listens for updates from the ViewModel with
the [`ListenableBuilder`][] widget. 
Everything in the widget subtree under the 
`ListenableBuilder` widget re-renders when the
provided [`Listenable`][] changes. In this case, 
the provided `Listenable` is the ViewModel. 
Recall that the ViewModel is of type [`ChangeNotifier`][] 
which is a subtype of the `Listenable` type.

```dart
// app/lib/ui/home/widgets/home_screen.dart
 
@override

>   Widget build(BuildContext context) {

Reviewer: The indentation looks off here. Feel free to left align the method, even if it would be indented in the actual file.
